AstraZeneca section (#900)
greenelab/covid19-review: content/22.vaccines.md

#### COVID-19 Vaccine AstraZeneca

> The  vaccine developed by AstraZeneca in collaboration with University of Oxford (brand name: ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 / AZD1222) is a vectored vaccine derived from isolate Y25 adenovirus of chimpanzee that encodes the spike protein of SARS-CoV-2. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The  vaccine developed by AstraZeneca in collaboration with University of Oxford, known as ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 or vaccine candidate AZD1222, is a vectored vaccine derived from isolate Y25 adenovirus of chimpanzee that encodes the spike protein of SARS-CoV-2. 
```

The previous clinical trials on the viral vector vaccine date back to 2014, where the vaccine was targeted at influenza A [@doi:10.1038/mt.2013.284,@doi:10.1016/j.ebiom.2018.02.011;@doi:10.1016/j.ebiom.2018.05.001], tuberculosis in 2019 [@doi:10.1016/j.vaccine.2019.10.102] and Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV) [@doi:10.1016/S1473-3099(20)30160-2]. 
The previous studies have lead to redisign and repurposing of the vector for SARS-CoV-2 [@doi:10.1136/bmj.n86].

In the first trials on SARS-Cov-2 virus, the vaccine candidate demonstrated a median of 80 virus-neutralizing titre in an inhibitory concentration (IC)100 assay [@doi:10.1038/s41586-020-2608-y].

> Phase 1/2 of clinical trial was registered on March 27, 2020 [@clinicaltrials:NCT04324606] and enrolled participants between April 23 and May 21, 2020. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The phase I/II clinical trial was registered on March 27, 2020 [@clinicaltrials:NCT04324606] and enrolled participants between April 23 and May 21, 2020. 
```

This single-blind, randomised controlled trial was carried out on 1077 participants: 543 received  ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 and 534 meningococcal vacine MenACWY. 

> The median age of trial participants was 35 years (IQR 28–44), the cohort included predominately white (979, 90.9%) participants, out of which 536 were female (49.8%) and 541 were males (50.2%). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The median age of trial participants was 35 years old (IQR 28–44) and the cohort included predominately white (979, 90.9%) participants, out of which 536 were female (49.8%) and 541 were males (50.2%). 
```

The vaccine showed safe profile, with spike-specific  T-cell peaking  on  day  14  and anti-spike IgG responses  rising  by  day  28 and remaining elevated to day 56.

> Some systemic adverse local reactions included pain, feeling feverish, chills, muscle ache, headache, and malaise  [@doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(20)31604-4].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Some systemic adverse local reactions included pain, feeling feverish, chills, muscle ache, headache, and malaise  [@doi:10/gg5gwk].
```

The Phase II/III clinical trial was initiated in the UK and enrolled 560 participants of different age between May 30 and Aug 8, 2020 as a single-blinded randomized trial [@clinicaltrials:NCT04400838]. 

> The main finding were safety of the vaccine, decreased anti-spike IgG responses at day 28 with age, but similar level of antibody titres after receiving a booster dosage [@doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(20)32466-1].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The main finding were safety of the vaccine, decreased anti-spike IgG responses at day 28 with age, but similar level of antibody titres after receiving a booster dosage [@doi:10/ghk7t7].
```

> The main finding were safety of the vaccine, decreased anti-spike IgG responses at day 28 with age, but similar level of antibody titres after receiving a booster dosage [@doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(20)32466-1].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The main finding were safety of the vaccine, decreased anti-spike IgG responses at day 28 with age, but similar levels of antibody titres after receiving a booster dosage [@doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(20)32466-1].
```

> Phase II/III clinical trial was carried out as 4 independent locations: in the UK  [@clinicaltrials:NCT04400838], Brasil [@clinicaltrials:NCT04536051] and South Africa  [@clinicaltrials:NCT04444674] and finally in the United States in August 2020 [@clinicaltrials:NCT04516746; @url:https://s3.amazonaws.com/ctr-med-7111/D8110C00001/52bec400-80f6-4c1b-8791-0483923d0867/c8070a4e-6a9d-46f9-8c32-cece903592b9/D8110C00001_CSP-v2.pdf]. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The phase II/III clinical trial was carried out at 4 independent locations in the UK  [@clinicaltrials:NCT04400838], Brasil [@clinicaltrials:NCT04536051], South Africa  [@clinicaltrials:NCT04444674], and the United States in August 2020 [@clinicaltrials:NCT04516746; @url:https://s3.amazonaws.com/ctr-med-7111/D8110C00001/52bec400-80f6-4c1b-8791-0483923d0867/c8070a4e-6a9d-46f9-8c32-cece903592b9/D8110C00001_CSP-v2.pdf]. 
```

> In September 2020, the global trials had to be shortly paused due to a serious adverse neurological reaction in some of the participants [@doi:10.1038/d41586-020-02633-6].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In September 2020, the trials had to be temporarily paused due to reports of serious adverse neurological reactions thought to be associated with immunization of some participants, but the trials later resumed following an investigation that found no association [@doi:10.1038/d41586-020-02633-6].
```

> The interim results of Phase III were announced in a press release on November 23, 2020 [@url:https://www.astrazeneca.com/content/astraz/media-centre/press-releases/2020/azd1222hlr.html] and published in Lancet on December 9, 2020 [@doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(20)32661-1; @url:https://www.astrazeneca.com/content/astraz/media-centre/press-releases/2020/azd1222-oxford-phase-iii-trials-interim-analysis-results-published-in-the-lancet.html]. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The interim results of Phase III were announced in a press release on November 23, 2020 [@url:https://www.astrazeneca.com/content/astraz/media-centre/press-releases/2020/azd1222hlr.html] and published in Lancet on December 9, 2020 [@doi:10/fmq2; @url:https://www.astrazeneca.com/content/astraz/media-centre/press-releases/2020/azd1222-oxford-phase-iii-trials-interim-analysis-results-published-in-the-lancet.html]. 
```

> The studies were met with skepticism, due to multiple inonsistencies in their design, including the errorneous dosing regimen in which multiple of 11,636 participants received half of the initial dose eventually leading to increased vaccine efficacy (90% vs 62.1% for two full doses protocol), using multiple testing sites and different placebos (meningococcal conjugate vaccine or saline) [@url:https://www.businessinsider.com/astrazenecas-covid-19-vaccine-trials-criticised-2020-11; @doi:10.1136/bmj.m4777; @doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(20)32623-4].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The studies were met with skepticism, due to multiple inconsistencies in their design.
These include the erroneous dosing regimen in which many of the 11,636 participants received half of the initial intended dose eventually leading to increased vaccine efficacy (90% vs 62.1% for two full doses protocol), using multiple testing sites and different placebos (meningococcal conjugate vaccine or saline) [@url:https://www.businessinsider.com/astrazenecas-covid-19-vaccine-trials-criticised-2020-11; @doi:10.1136/bmj.m4777; @doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(20)32623-4].
```

Reviewer: In have added wording suggestions, but I agree with @ajlee21, would a lower dose not lead to lower efficacy . . . Something not clear here

The research in the UK showed that even a single dosage offered significant reduction in symptomatic SARS-CoV2 positive cases in the UK [@doi:10.1101/2021.03.01.21252652]. 

> This was one of the reasons to delay the second inoculation (booster dosage) and administer it no sonner than 12 weeks [@doi:10.1136/bmj.m4968; @doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(21)00528-6; @doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(21)00432-3]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This was one of the reasons to delay the second inoculation (booster dosage) and administer it no sooner than 12 weeks [@doi:10.1136/bmj.m4968; @doi:10/f2qv; @doi:10/fwk7]
```

> The emergence use of the vaccine was approved in the UK on December 30, 2020 [@url:https://www.astrazeneca.com/media-centre/press-releases/2020/astrazenecas-covid-19-vaccine-authorised-in-uk.html], followed by authorization by European EMA on January 29, 2021 [@url:https://www.ema.europa.eu/en/news/ema-recommends-covid-19-vaccine-astrazeneca-authorisation-eu]. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The vaccine received emergency use authorization in the UK on December 30, 2020 [@url:https://www.astrazeneca.com/media-centre/press-releases/2020/astrazenecas-covid-19-vaccine-authorised-in-uk.html], followed by authorization by European EMA on January 29, 2021 [@url:https://www.ema.europa.eu/en/news/ema-recommends-covid-19-vaccine-astrazeneca-authorisation-eu]. 
```

> Due to emergence of new coronavirus variants, in particular so called South African 501Y.V2 variant (B.1.351 lineage), and reports of growing inefficacy of the vaccine to prevent mild to moderate cases [@url:https://arstechnica.com/science/2021/02/scary-22-vaccine-efficacy-in-south-africa-comes-with-heaps-of-caveats/], South Africa has stopped AstraZeneca's vaccine rollout on February 9, 2021 [@doi:10.1136/bmj.n372].

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Due to emergence of new coronavirus variants, in particular the so called South African 501Y.V2 variant (B.1.351 lineage), and reports of growing inefficacy of the vaccine to prevent mild to moderate cases [@url:https://arstechnica.com/science/2021/02/scary-22-vaccine-efficacy-in-south-africa-comes-with-heaps-of-caveats/], South Africa has stopped AstraZeneca's vaccine rollout on February 9, 2021 [@doi:10.1136/bmj.n372].
```

Reviewer: This might fit better in the global distribution section, but will leave it here for now
